src/doc/articles/howto_build.md, before:

<!-- Copyright Ion Fusion contributors. All rights reserved. -->
<!-- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 -->

# Building Ion Fusion

> **Prerequisites:**
>
> * Install a Java runtime, version 8 or later. We recommend [Amazon Corretto][].
> * Install [Git][].
> * Ensure that `java` and `git` are on your shell's `PATH`.

Building from source should be straightforward:

    git clone https://github.com/ion-fusion/fusion-java.git
    cd fusion-java
    ./gradlew release

After a successful release build, you'll have a basic SDK under `build/install/fusion`. The notable
artifacts within that directory are:

* `bin/fusion` is the `fusion` CLI
* `docs/fusiondoc/fusion.html` is the documentation for the Ion Fusion language
* `docs/javadoc/index.html` is the documentation embedding Ion Fusion in your Java application
* `lib` holds the jars needed for embedding

To experiment with the CLI, add the `bin` to your path:

    PATH=$PATH:$PWD/build/install/fusion/bin
    fusion help

That should give you an overview of the CLI's subcommands.


## What's Next?

With the `fusion` CLI ready to go, you can follow the [CLI tutorial](tutorial_cli.html) and run
some code!


[Amazon Corretto]: https://aws.amazon.com/corretto
[Git]: https://git-scm.com/

Commit message:

Update Gradle from `8.10.2` to `9.2.1`. (#356)
This requires Java 17 or later to run `gradle`, but we still use the Java 8 toolchain to compile and test.

src/doc/articles/howto_build.md, after:

<!-- Copyright Ion Fusion contributors. All rights reserved. -->
<!-- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 -->

# Building Ion Fusion

> **Prerequisites:**
>
> * Install a Java runtime, version 17 or later. We recommend [Amazon Corretto][].
>   * This project builds for Java 8, but its Gradle tooling requires 17.
> * Install [Git][].
> * Ensure that `java` and `git` are on your shell's `PATH`.

Building from source should be straightforward:

    git clone https://github.com/ion-fusion/fusion-java.git
    cd fusion-java
    ./gradlew release

After a successful release build, you'll have a basic SDK under `build/install/fusion`. The notable
artifacts within that directory are:

* `bin/fusion` is the `fusion` CLI
* `docs/fusiondoc/fusion.html` is the documentation for the Ion Fusion language
* `docs/javadoc/index.html` is the documentation embedding Ion Fusion in your Java application
* `lib` holds the jars needed for embedding

To experiment with the CLI, add the `bin` to your path:

    PATH=$PATH:$PWD/build/install/fusion/bin
    fusion help

That should give you an overview of the CLI's subcommands.


## What's Next?

With the `fusion` CLI ready to go, you can follow the [CLI tutorial](tutorial_cli.html) and run
some code!


[Amazon Corretto]: https://aws.amazon.com/corretto
[Git]: https://git-scm.com/
